Prepared by: Gary Haines, Archivist, The Law Society 24 September 2024Copyright: All material on this website is subject to our copyright. You may use any of our material under the terms of our Creative Commons – Attribution – Share Alike licence. This permits you to distribute, adapt, or build upon our work, for any purpose including commercially, as long as you (1) credit www.fleetstreetheritage.co.uk (2) includes link where possible and (3) licence yournew creation under identical terms to this. Additional notesThe LibraryA library was included in the building proposals from its conception and the Royal Charter, granted to the Law Society in 1845 specifically mentions a librarian. A core reason for this was to further establish the solicitor as a recognised profession and improve education and standards. The library is one of the most atmospheric rooms in the building, complete with comfy chairs, old fireplaces and beautiful architecture. Its marble columns are a particularly interesting feature as they are not actually marble but imitation marble, using a technique called Scagliola. This is thought to have originated in the 17th century and contributes to the Grade 2* listed status of the library. The historical surroundings should not disguise the fact that the library holds one of the most comprehensive and up to date legal collections for practitioners in the UK with some 34,000 titles. Members of The Law Society can gain access to this resource in person and advice from the expert legal librarians. They can also access resources via the website which also shows a video of the beautiful library.Law Society library | The Law SocietyThe Hall has two other architecturally outstanding rooms; the Common Room and the Reading Room. The Common Room is decorated with stained glass bearing armorial bearings which were originally displayed at the Hall of Serjeant’s Inn which was built in 1678 and the glass was given to The Law Society in 1926. It also has mahogany panelling, a freeze by the renowned Conrad Dressler and a peacock-tiled fireplace. The Reading Room is a quiet space to be used by members with tables and chairs for reading, studying and meetings but is no less architecturally impressive. Portraits of past Presidents of the Society hang around this spacious room, alongside the first secretary of the Law Society Robert Maugham, the grandfather of W. Somerset Maugham.A war memorial on marble tablets by Gilbert Bayes is displayed around the room, recording on vellum, the names of those solicitors and articled clerks who lost their lives in the First World War. The plate collection of The Law Society glints in the light and at the rear of the room a bronze statue of Athene guards ‘The Book of Memory’, a book of remembrance which pays tribute to those solicitors and articled clerks who lost their lives in the Second World War. The fireplace frieze is also by Gilbert Bayes, best known for his work on the Queen of Time clock located above the Selfridges store main entrance.Another highlight of the building is the golden lions that stare impassively out as passers-by in Chancery Lane, seemingly forming a cordon of protection around the front of the building. These were commissioned in 1903. However, there are conflicting stories as to whether these lions are the commissioned lions, replicas of those carved by Alfred Stevens for the railings that surrounded the British Museum, or some of the original sculptures removed from the British Museum in 1895 and given to The Law Society. Only the lions know. 