Ludgate Circus to Shoe Lane 
Thomas Cook (No.107-111, currently Ludgate House)
Built from 1872 and extended in 1906, it wraps a reasonably ornate  Classicism from Ludgate Circus onto Fleet Street. Thematic sculpture  about travel around the doorcases of particular interest. Original design by Horace Gundy. (claxity.com)

Daily Express Building (No. 120-129)
The larger complex of the former newspaper premises stretches across an entire block: from Poppins Lane to Shoe Lane and back to St Bride Street. The remaining item of interest, at the corner with Shoe Lane, is a 1930 curtain-walled Streamline Moderne icon clad in black Vitrolite and glass and cantilevered over the side return. The exterior design and advanced construction solutions are largely the work of Owen Williams. The entrance hall is a spectacular Art Deco concoction by Robert Atkinson. Grade II* listed.

Shoe Lane to Wine Office Court
No. 130
A rather odd mix of Northern Renaissance and Neogothic details with large modernist windows on the upper storeys. 1907 by RM Roe.

No. 131
This narrow somewhat Postmodern entrance element shows how No.130 and Mersey House next door were grouped into a single edifice (for Goldman Sachs) in 1988 by Kohn Pederson Fox.

Mersey House (No. 132-134)
Formerly the London offices of the Liverpool Post and Liverpool Echo, it is an interesting example of the late form (1904) of Arts & Crafts known at the time as ‘modern style’; a term taken over later by entirely different architectural styles. Large granite entrance archway followed by equally bold bow front, flanked by cyclopean columns. Grade II listed.

Daily Telegraph Building (No. 135-141)
Replacing an earlier 1881 building for the same newspaper, this 1928 design by T Tait with Elcock & Sutcliffe is a bold expression of Art Deco eclecticism, including Classicising, Egyptian Revival and geometric details. Note, too, the subtle tripartism of the facade, both in the vertical and horizontal development. The sturdy basement and ground storey with allegorical carving above the door and metal-framed display windows, is followed by an almost full-width balcony above which rises an order of giant fluted columns. The geometric mouldings at the sides of this central composition fade back toward the thin and tall fenestration of the lateral segments. The attic storeys are set back from the side wings, forming a characteristic stepped composition. Grade II listed.

The Kings & Keys (No. 142)
A former pub with a narrow, Neo-Jacobean facade bearing the inscription 1884 by Hooker & Hemming and displaying complex articulation of the window forms plus carved spandrels and window aprons below a shaped gable.

Queen of Scots House (No. 143-144)
Gothic revival of 1905 by R M Roe benefitting from delicate tracery at the window lintels and aprons plus bargeboard flashing beneath the twin gables. A Statue of Mary Queen of Scots between the two bays was specified by the developer. Grade II listed.

Ye Olde Cheshire Cheese (No. 145)
The Neo-Georgian shopfront along Fleet Street is from 1991 (Waterhouse & Ripley) but the fabric of the building is C17, with C18 and C19 additions. Worthwhile preservation of historical interiors and the entrance from Wine Office Court is C18. Grade II listed.

Wine Office Court to Bolt Court 
No. 146
This Grade II listed building partly overhanging Wine Office Court is, despite later modifications, largely C17 in origin. Basic brick box construction.

No. 147
C20 rebuild on the original narrow plot, with undistinguished band windows only minimally lifted by the basketweave brick bond between floors.

No. 148
Spanning the entrance to Hind Court, this Victorian refacing in white stucco has limited appeal besides the carved spandrels in the window arches on the fifth storey.

No. 149
Late C19, simplified Jacobean style with a striped arch on the second storey and a carved, pulvinated frieze above the fourth. Terminates with a slightly abstracted Dutch gable.

No 150. And No. 151
Despite being unified by a common set of subsidiary and principal cornices, bands of bricks and ample ribbon windows, the articulation of each subplot is varied in the vertical sense, with No 150 being flanked by rather free-style suspended piers while the frontage of No. 151 can boast just two bas-relief colonnettes on the second storey. Above the cornice, two oculi frame a rather cramped dormer arrangement.

