In February 2022, local businesses voted overwhelmingly in favour of establishing the Fleet Street Quarter Business Improvement District (BID). This favourable outcome demonstrated a strong mandate amongst businesses to work more collectively in leading, shaping and influencing a comprehensive programme of activity – positioning the Fleet Street Quarter as a thriving and vibrant destination. 
Encompassing an area which features Fleet Street at its heart, but embracing fascinating areas such as Chancery Lane, Holborn, Ludgate Hill and New Street Square, the Fleet Street Quarter aspires to shape the whole area into a thriving place to live, work, and visit.
Through careful stewardship and curation, our programme of work fosters inclusion, diversity, innovation, celebrates culture, and helps to deliver a green, sustainable and safe business district. The BID creates a strong business collective, providing a powerful voice for local businesses, who are represented on Steering Groups for each Key Strategic Theme, which guide the work of the FSQ BID Executive Team.
Through collaboration and partnership working we will champion a cohesive plan of action to create a vibrant and dynamic location that will reposition the Fleet Street Quarter as a place to work, visit, live and invest in.
Through strategic partnerships, targeted marketing, and a program of cultural and business-led initiatives, we have enhanced the Quarter’s profile, attracted new opportunities and driven footfall. We will showcase the local offering and celebrate the assets across the area, reclaiming the district as a globally thriving destination.
The BID footprint spans just over 43 hectares, made up of a network of streets, alleyways and courtyards. Fleet Street Quarter is challenged by the narrow footpaths, limited squares and a deficiency of green spaces. We will work in partnership with the City Corporation on a programme of investment for high quality public realm, exploring using spaces in a different way and testing more alternative opportunities.
As well as enhancing the physical experience when visiting the area, the BID will focus on collaborating with our business community and public sector partners to tackle climate change, air quality issues, making our district more climate resilient to future-proof the Fleet Street Quarter. With initiatives such as the Green Skills Construction Hub and the Urban Farmer Project we’re encouraging innovative solutions to enhance green infrastructure and promote sustainable practices.
Promoting a vibrant and progressive cultural offer will attract new audiences, attract new talent and enable us to build a more cutting-edge offer. Working with our business members and the City Corporation we aim to deliver, align and complement the City Corporation’s five-year action plan – The Square Mile: Future City. We aim to create and inclusive, innovative and sustainable business ecosystem.
We want to galvanise the rich talent pool by generating a progressive and lively location, with a wider more rounded offer, incorporating leisure, hospitality and culture. Our community is important to us- there is a unique sense of neighbourhood across our footprint and as a BID we want to harness this and build on it.
We look to support the SME sector and its contribution to the FSQ district. Our mix of businesses is a huge asset and is to be celebrated, alongside animating and enhancing the streets and spaces, creating a seamless and coherent destination.
The BID will take a strategic approach which seeks to tackle challenges and critical issues for businesses in our area, from the threat of terrorism and anti-social behaviour to clean streets, rough sleeping and low-level street crime. We want our area to feel safe and secure during the day, but also as we support the growth of the night-time economy. 
Our initiatives, such as targeted crime prevention events, and visible security measures through our friendly ambassadors, have contributed to a greater peace of mind for businesses, employees, and visitors alike. Together, we are shaping a community where safety is not only a priority but a lasting achievement.
Our Fleet Street Quarter Ambassador team provide a visual presence around the Fleet Street Quarter area Monday to Friday, ensuring the area is as safe and clean as possible, as well as providing a welcoming face to the Quarter so that it can be enjoyed to the maximum by the local workforce and visitors alike. 
Find out more about the Fleet Street Quarter BID on our website, fleetstreetquarter.co.uk
