Prepared by: Piers Nicholson, 2022 Copyright: All material on this website is subject to our copyright. You may use any of our material under the terms of our Creative Commons – Attribution – Share Alike licence. This permits you to distribute, adapt, or build upon our work, for any purpose including commercially, as long as you (1) credit www.fleetstreetheritage.co.uk (2) includes link where possible and (3) licence your new creation under identical terms to this. Further reading: Webpages - Museum of London, Great Fire of London live stream parts 1,2 and 3 While the date 1666 is widely known, it is not so widely known that the year before it, 1665, had seen a virulent outbreak of plague. So the population was not in good general health when the Great Fire broke out.And, of course, it created an immediate refugee crisis, with 100,000people having no home to go to. In the immediate aftermath of the fire, they could camp on the high ground of Highgate and Ilinton to the north, but this rapidly became less tenable as the very cold winter of 1666/67 set in. There are very few records to the sufferings of the common pole after the Great Fire, but if must have been a time of great poverty and privation. And, of course, there was no state support available for the infirm, elderly or destitute members of society as there is today. There was a national Fast day organised to raise money for the refugees, and it raised the huge sum of £12,000. There were a number of grand schemes for a complete redesign of the street pattern of London, most notable that of Sir Christopher Wren with wide boulevards radiating from St. Pauls. But it was decided to preserve the existing street pattern, mainly on grounds of reduced cost and of speedier rebuilding. The only permanent changes made to the London street layout were the canalisation of the Fleet River which was completely brick over at its southern end. And two new streets, King Street and Queen Street, were built from the Guildhall to the river.Photos: 1.	The Extent of the Great Fire of London2.	The Fire Table, at which the Fire Court Judges sat in Cliffords Inn3.	Sir Matthew Hale, one of the Fire Court Judges