# source: extracted-from-pdf — review before publishing

This unusual east-facing sundial is situated on a vertical wall at the corner of Bouverie Street and Fleet Street in central London.

It measures 10 metres square, and is believed to be the largest vertical sundial in the United Kingdom, and possibly also in Europe. The sundial was opened by the Lady Mayoress of London, Hilary Russell, in October 2021. It commemorates the newspaper industry which, for nearly 300 years, was centred on the Fleet Street area.  The face of the sundial shows 5 of the mastheads of newspapers which are no longer published. (Current newspapers could not be shown due to planning restrictions in the City of London: the titles of the newspapers to be displayed on the sundial were selected by a local public consultation.) More details about the origins, design, execution, and building of this sundial are given on the website www.

fleetstreetheritagesundial.uk. There are videos showing the opening of the sundial, and  videos showing a number of the sections of the meticulous painting of the sundial by our signwriter. The overall result is a highly-visible sundial which is also effective in flagging up the importance of Fleet Street as the cradle of our national newspaper industry.

There are two other interesting modern public sundials in Central London. The Blackfriars Polar Sundial was presented to the City of London by the Tylers and Bricklayers Company in 1999; it is mounted on a plinth of exactly 2000 bricks.

There is also a large “Timepiece” equatorial dial designed by Wendy Hiller outside the T ower Hotel near T ower Bridge.

Both these dials and many others appear on the London Thames sundial trail at www.sundials.co/~thames.htm The Fleet Street Heritage Sundial The sundial showing 10 am (sun time) on 21st October 2021. The gnomon which casts the shadow is at the top left hand corner of the sundial; the shadow moves slowly across and down the sundial during the morning The Lady Mayoress of London, Hilary Russell, cutting the tape to open the sundial Painting the sundial in One of the three plaques at eyel level
