# source: extracted-from-pdf — review before publishing

Edward Lloyd (1815–1890) began publishing popular serial fiction in the 1830s and, in April 1840, launched the Penny Sunday Times and People’s Police Gazette.

Although mostly fiction, there was a large wood engraving on the front page that told the story of a contemporary crime or news event, which, as it was image rather than text, allowed him to avoid the Newspaper Stamp Duty, payable at the time. When Herbert Ingram launched his Illustrated London News in 1842 in similar format, Lloyd responded with Lloyd’s Penny Illustrated Newspaper. Despite consisting solely of fiction, the authorities demanded that it carry the Newspaper Stamp and after six issues it was reborn as Lloyd’s Illustrated London Newspaper now priced at twopence to account for the tax.

Despite a circulation of 32,000, in January 1843 Lloyd found it necessary to drop the illustrations, raise the price to twopence-halfpenny (later threepence) and change the name to Lloyd’s Weekly London Newspaper. Nevertheless, the size of the paper was increased to twelve pages with five columns per page providing more content than the recently launched News of the World. The Stamp Duty also conferred the benefit of free postage and Lloyd sold many copies by subscription, as newsagents were reluctant to handle it due to the low profit margins.

Lloyd had now moved his offices to Salisbury Square off Fleet Street and in 1848 the name was again changed to Lloyd’s Weekly Newspaper, reflecting its growth in distribution and wide news coverage.

One of Lloyd’s first editors was William Carpenter - a prominent Chartist who had been imprisoned in 1831 for his protests against the Stamp Duty - and the tone of the paper was always supportive of working people and not aligned to any political party. One popular feature was the “Answers to Correspondents” column which provided advice on legal and employment subjects, although as the original question was not stated, it appears cryptic today.

In 1852, Lloyd appointed Douglas Jerrold as editor; journalist, writer and playwright, he was a well-known figure in the mid-century literary world and the appointment boosted sales, as did the exhaustive coverage of the Duke of Wellington’s death and funeral that year - the funeral alone generating some 150,000 sales.

The abolition of the Newspaper Stamp Duty in 1855 allowed Lloyd to lower the price to twopence and the regular weekly circulation reached 100,000 copies. This output stretched the technology of the time and in 1856 Lloyd imported two R. Hoe & Co type-revolving machines from America.

These rotary presses used ordinary type and could produce 15,000 impressions per hour. Further refinements allowed increased production and they were soon adopted by other newspapers, including the Times. The association with Lloyd continued and Hoe opened his London office in a building adjacent to Salisbury Square.

By 1861, the weekly circulation had risen to 170,000 and after the removal of the Paper Duty, Lloyd was able to reduce the price to the iconic one penny. The first issue at that price sold out at 350,000 copies. He continued to invest in new technology and also started to manufacture paper at new premises at Bow Bridge on the river Lea and later at Sittingbourne in Kent. The late 1860s saw the development of the papier mâché curved stereotype and Hoe rotary web presses which eventually replaced the type-revolving machines.

In 1885, Lloyd’s long time employee, Thomas Catling, a keen supporter of William Gladstone, took over the editorship. The circulation continued to increase after Lloyd’s death in 1890, so much so that on 16 February 1896, Lloyd’s Weekly became the only British newspaper in the nineteenth century to sell more than a million copies.

In 1918, Lloyd’s Weekly along with Lloyd’s other paper, the Daily Chronicle, was sold to Lloyd George’s political friends. After the takeover, Lloyd’s Weekly ceased to prosper. The name had already been changed from Lloyd’s Weekly Newspaper to Lloyd’s Weekly News in 1902, to Lloyd’s Sunday News in 1918 and finally just the Sunday News in 1924. The title disappeared in 1931 when it was bought by Allied Newspapers and subsumed into the Sunday Graphic.
