# source: extracted-from-pdf — review before publishing

The Sun began its present existence, as a compact size newspaper published under Rupert Murdoch’s ownership, on 17th November 1969.

However its pedigree dates back to 1912 when the Daily Herald was founded with official Labour backing. By 1961 the Herald, now owned by Odhams Press and the T rades Union Congress, was in serious difficulties and was sold to the Mirror Group. Three years later the International Publishing Corporation acquired the title, ceased its publication and launched a new paper in its place. It was titled The Sun, and was a broadsheet aimed at the affluent young and the graduates and technocrats coming out of redbrick universities and technology colleges. Despite initial success, losses mounted and the paper was sold to Mr Murdoch.

In the last issue of the old Sun the new proprietor published a signed editorial in which he wrote “The most important thing to remember is that the new Sun will still be…the paper that cares – passionately – about truth, and beauty and justice…The new Sun will have a conscience. It will never forget its radical traditions. It will be truly independent, but politically mighty aware. It will never, ever hesitate to speak its mind. It will never sit on fences. It will never be boring.”

The new-look Sun became an easy-to-read tabloid in keeping with a promise made in its first issue to be a fresh, lively and campaigning newspaper produced for ordinary people. “The Sun cares. About the quality of life. About the kind of world we live in. And about people,” it pledged. It grew rapidly and in May 1978 its 6-month circulation had passed that of the Daily Mirror for the first time. The following month its monthly circulation exceeded 4 million for the first time. The Sun has since then grown into much more than a paper, it is a Newsbrand with a voice you cannot ignore, able to speak to a huge, varied and diverse audience.

The Sun is especially known for its memorable front page headlines, holding the powerful to account and jaw dropping exclusives. The Sun is also noted for its strong sports coverage, royal and celebrity scoops in addition to its concise news coverage. The Sun has always had a strong focus on coverage aimed at women, from Pacesetters to Sun Woman and the Fabulous brand. It also launched the famous Dear Deidre advice column in 1980, still running today offering Sun readers free advice.

The Sun’s interaction with its readers and an ability to mobilise them is legendary. It was the first newspaper to give out a £1 million bingo prize and, in 1988, the final entry of 4,305,162 for its first Lotto game was recognised by the Guinness Book of Records as being the largest ever entry in a newspaper competition. The Sun is also the UK’s biggest short break provider having sent over 55 million people on holiday since it launched this offer in 1991.

By its best estimate, Sun readers have raised around £100m supporting good causes including Tiddlers for T oddlers, the Zeebrugge Disaster Fund, Haiti’s earthquake victims and Help for Heroes. The Sun has also launched campaigns such as Jabs Army, recruiting over 60,000 volunteers to help roll out the COVID-19 vaccination programme and setting up the Millies and Who Cares Wins awards to honour our military and NHS heroes.

Front page first edition of the Sun
