Fleet Street presents a particularly rich number of architectural examples in terms of stylistic and chronological diversity. It would not be too great an exaggeration to state that one could teach an entire course on British architectural history without straying far from Fleet Street.
The quality of its built form stems from geographic as well as historical factors. Spatially, Fleet Street forms a large portion of the main road linking the cities of London and Westminster—the twin centres of national political and economic power for nine centuries. Not all thoroughfares, however, can boast such a close association with central aspects of national life. In the case of Fleet Street, these include the world of the press and media, the legal profession and ‘private’ banking (banking for wealthy clients). In turn, the presence of such important industries resulted in the establishment of many retail and commercial premises, including a substantial number of drinking dens.
This comprehensive guide to the architecture of Fleet Street is divided into five parts. This page provides an explanation of the numbering of buildings in Fleet Street which have short descriptions in the following four pages, each of which covers a quarter of the buildings now existing in Fleet Street. Some of these short descriptions have links to the claxity.com website, which has full descriptions of the architectural features of each building together with excellent photographs. Where the buildings are listed in Historic England, there is a link to that listing. Many more photographs will be found in the Photos section. Together, these resources provide a simple, accessible, and full guide to the many architectural treasures of this iconic street. 
Fleet Street is not numbered in the more usual British system using odd numbers on one side of the street and even numbers on the other. Since it was one of the first streets to be numbered, the numbers run consecutively from Temple Bar to Ludgate Circus along the South side (nos 1-101) and then back along the North side from Ludgate Circus to Temple Bar (nos. 107-194). Buildings are also identified by the names of their original owners. 
Our detailed pages divide Fleet Street into four sections:
Fleet Street (South side) from Temple Bar to Pleydell Court (nos. 1 to 55)
Fleet Street (South side) from Pleydell Court to Ludgate Circus (nos. 56 to 101) 
Fleet Street (North side) from Ludgate Circus to Bolt Court (nos. 107 to 151)
Fleet Street (North side) from Bolt Court to Temple Bar (nos. 152 to 194)
