Source: Stainless steel panels in Ashentree Court, London, EC4 Prepared by: PN, 2022 Copyright: All material on this website is subject to our copyright.  You may use any of our material under the terms of our Creative Commons – Attribution – Share Alike licence.  This permits you to distribute, adapt, or build upon our work, for any purpose including commercially, as long as you (1) credit www.fleetstreetheritage.co.uk (2) include a link where possible and (3) licence your new creation under identical terms to this.  Additional notes: (The text below continues the text on the main page)The press is now exhibited at the Science Museum at Wroughton, and these plaques exist as a memorial at the location where it was housed and used.  This display's purpose is to highlight its industrial and archaeological significance.  The Wood Press was the last printing press to be in use in Fleet Street. Lord Northcliffe based his empire upon the model set by the American newspapers and their printing presses.  With the importation of American printing presses Northcliffe House led the way in the abandonment of deck type presses, and the introduction of unit type presses with magazine reel stands.  These were the first to incorporate a process where production could remain continuous without the need to interrupt to change paper reels.  Northcliffe House was also the first to use conveyors to transfer the folded newspapers from the basement to the ground floor.  The machines were operated by the most powerful electric motors of the time producing 100 horsepower each. It was known as the best machine with regard to print quality and lack of vibrations.  It was divided into three levels.  The lower level rested on the basement floor slab while the upper levels were supported on a steel frame incorporating a walkway around them.  Although the actual weight of the press is not known a similar one manufactured by Wood contained 92 tons of steel and 41 tons of cast iron and other materials. The lower level of the press 
The lower level consisted of three magazine reel stands and a large electric motor.  The motor turned a main shaft by means of a belt which in turn powered all the units, by a system of gearing and secondary drive shafts. 

The magazine reel stands at this level provided minimum disruption to production during paper reel replacement; by a process known as 'flying paster '. 

As the paper reel was running low it was moved around so that a full reel was then positioned uppermost.  The full reel was then pasted onto the old reel and for a short while the two of them ran through together until the old reel was out. During this process the press was slowed down but most importantly it did not need to stop. The middle level of the press 
The middle level of the press consisted of three printing units and a folder.  Slightly raised wooden footboards on either side gave access to the printing cylinders.  The printing process used a series of rollers with ink and lubrication boxes.  Presses like this normally had a 'fudge box' for the printing of late news in the 'Stop Press' column. The folder with the name 'WOOD' on it was situated between two printers and consisted of two separate folding units.  The folders worked on a system of sloping triangular wedges, wires, rollers and cylindrical tubes. The upper level of the press 
The upper level consisted of another printing unit and rollers to which a walkway was added around the outside.  The rollers raise the newspapers up a distance of 2.5m in height. Process Flow 
From the magazine reel stands, the paper was guided by rollers up to the printing units on the middle level of the press.  A raised image on one cylinder was inked by rollers and transferred to paper by passing between it and an impression cylinder. The paper would flow through the impression cylinders each plate would be four pages wide.  As the paper progressed through the printing unit, a total of eight pages printed on both sides would be produced.  The cylinders were also able to produce spot colour on the back or the front of the paper. Following the printing the paper would be guided through rollers on the upper level of the machine.  The paper was assembled by the rollers of the upper level, above the folder on the middle level. The paper was cut lengthwise and then sorted, so that as they passed down the folder they had been divided into two lines containing all the pages needed for the paper in the correct order. The triangular wedges were used to draw the paper together in order to put the crease in the spine.  The paper would then pass over rollers that would actually cause the crease.  The 'cut off' occurred just below this at which point the individual newspaper appeared.  The individual newspapers dropped through another set of rollers or cylinders to put a crease in the spine and create the finished item. The newspapers then passed out of the delivery chute at the base of the folder known as the 'fly'.  Every twenty-fifth copy was delivered askew to enable fast and accurate counting.  From here the papers could be taken away by wire elevator to the side of the folder to a delivery room to be despatched. 